The following is an interview by Elmer Sparks with
Celia Black, former slave of Tyler Texas. This
being October the 11th, 1974, many years have
passed since Mrs. Black first arrived in this
world on September the 10th, 1859.
I'd like to ask you a few questions about your early
life, and the time you were born, and your
schooling, and you go ahead and tell what you
might, and we might ask
you a few more questions. I had my birthday, my
birthday, I had a nice time. I had a nice time. I
enjoyed
it. I enjoyed it. The nice white people was there,
and the president was there, and his wife, and
shook hands with me, and just, I don't know. I just
enjoyed it. I did. I enjoyed it with so many people
there. And I didn't
think that
I had the name to be recognized enough to go on
there. I didn't think I'd be recognized enough to
go on there. But I've always had that feeling of
wanting to be myself. and the way his white and
colors both of them care for me. Whenever my
colors,
white and colors for me to do anything and have
anything to do with them, I'd always let it, let it
clean, kept myself clean, and I always tried to
teach They're
nice, and I was good to them. I was good to the
children. And I just couldn't be no better son than
I was. And I didn't care when they called for me
to do anything. I was right there ready to do it,
because I'm going to try to do what I could if I know.
So that's the way I carried myself. And
I'm so proud to know
that I've been mechanized enough to care for me.
Oh, and in Texas, and in the United States. I'm so
proud to know that I'm cared for in the United
States. Oh! Oh, there's no fool not coming with me
down and can't help myself. If I felt like I
couldn't help, I'd always be ready. I'd be ready.
I'd be ready to help. Oh, God, it's true. I feel like
I could. I'd be ready to help. So... I'm down there
in the king, but I've
got a good desire. I've got a good mind. Oh, to be
content, to contend on trying to do what I can by the
help of the Lord. If I can't do, if I can't do, I can
speak well. I can speak well. Oh, it's hard to help.
Oh, as I can speak with a child of health. Oh, and my
speech. And I trust my Heavenly Father that I can be
honored enough to keep my, oh, to keep my
admiration up as long as the good Lord has led me,
spread me. You know, she's family. Well, you're
speaking of your celebration. Do you remember
anything about your folks are talking about the
back when you were born and that age? Fifty-one.
And back at your mother's town about from the time
you were born and where you were born, Dad? Barn.
Yes. I don't understand.
Celia, tell him about when you were a little baby
and a little girl. Oh, when I was a baby, I couldn't
have known nothing. I couldn't have known nothing
when I was a baby. No, sir. You remember your mother
talking about it, don't you? Yes,
sir. Mom? Mom. Do
you
remember when you were a baby girl and you used to
ride oxen and things? Yeah. Well, my grandfather
had some big old oxen. He had one with a big white
horn. Oh, it looked like a house.
Well, I hung there, and I used to sit up there and
tune them horns. And then his name was Coley. His
name was Coley, and the other one was named Lett.
Oh, and Grandpa didn't just drive him seriously.
where he
put up children in the old ox wagon and cast them
just as big as he was in a cage. And
I'd get up there in old Coley's,
paint in old Coley's home and sit up there. Sit up
there and
just be sitting in the house. But the funny story,
my grandfather went to town. No one wants to get so
nervous and have to go cross the river.
It's in the summertime in June, and The old oxen got
hot. They got hot. When they know this thing,
Grandpa know this thing, the old oxen run off and
run off into the river. River said, we're dead.
We're dead. We're away. And I stayed up there. And
O'Cord, O'Cord his own home, picked up in O'Cord
his home. And he's waved through the water. And the
second I came down, I stayed in there, too. I headed
to his home. I headed to his home, but I didn't pull
off in the river. I'm telling you, I headed, too.
Yes, I did. Oh! Oh, my grandpa was just hoping I'd
get my dad to live. And he was, and the old corner of
the electric
was coming through. They come out too, yes, they
did. Celia, tell him about when you were born in
Miss Clay's bed. I did. I was born behind this white
woman. I said, well, she was no poor woman. No, she
wasn't. Her husband was living there. Oh, she was
no poor woman. She brought my mother here from
South Oakland up in this country. She brought my
mother here in Texas when she was young. When my
mother was young, she wasn't grown.
She brought her here. She didn't get grown. With
her children.
Well, my father, with my high-handsome,
so-called man's name, Mr. Lawson. Mr. Robinson
was a white man, and Papa was a boy, and he did, Mr.
Clay both got hired to be the yard boy for Mama. She
was like, Mr. Clay, you know, After
that, after that, after you tell the world, I was,
they said, so my Papa and Mama got together. So now I
don't know how they got together. But anyhow, my
Papa and Mama, But Mrs. Cray had my father there.
Yeah, boy, he stayed there till he was a grown young
man, too, with Mrs. Cray. Right
in her yard, far out.
Her yard and her horses. You were born in Mrs.
Cray's bed? Uh-huh. So you were born with Mrs.
Cray? I was born right behind Mrs. Cray. On a
Tuesday morning, my mother said, my mother said to
me on a Tuesday morning, my eyes were on right
behind Ms. Clay in her bed. My mother always slept
with Ms. Clay when she was young, when she was 14 and
19. And Ms. Clay, after she married, My papa, Miss
Kelly wouldn't agree for my papa to take her away
from there, no. She wouldn't. She wouldn't agree
for us to try and take her away from there.
Oh! Oh! In them days, them days, the white people
had control over them. When they had a color of
help, it wouldn't be good for you to take them away
from them. And my mother would discuss it. She
wouldn't let nobody take her away from there. She
laid her there with her children. With her
children. She laid them there with her boys and
girls. She didn't have but one girl. Oh, but she had
five or six boys. She had five boys. Miss Craig did.
Mama loved this one. And
Miss Craig good. She didn't have one good. And she
was a big one. She wasn't big. She wasn't a big girl.
Oh,
but she stayed out. Until she got to be a young
missus.
Oh, with mama and her brother. She'd grown up to be
in there by the dorm. Before she, oh, I ever think
about trying to get it out amongst the boys.
Oh, man. You remember Abraham Mason? Better than
him? Who? I hear my mother talk about him and my
father, but I never did know him. I didn't even know
him myself, but I heard them talking about him all
the time. What did they say about President
Lincoln? Oh, well, they gave him a good name. They
gave him a good name. Oh, oh, and President Hall.
Oh, oh, they... They gave him a pretty good name.
They gave him a pretty good name. There's another
one I know, but I forgot it. Forgot his name.
Abraham Lincoln. Abraham Lincoln. That's it. Oh,
Abraham Lincoln, they thought Abraham was a
beast. They thought, everybody thought Abraham
was the best citizen in the world. They thought he
was the dead best. Did you do any picking geese or
preventive edge and things like that in those
days? Did I have any? I wasn't nothing but a kid. I
didn't have a sense of things like I got now. I
didn't have a sense of things. I didn't know
nothing about them. Nothing.
I can tell them it's crazy to be a young business.
The only time I know anything about the company.
And then my papa had this, oh man. Did you ever pick
cotton
out in
the fields? They can't. Oh, good graces of life.
They can't. I've raised them, see, and I've fed
them. Miss Craig, they have got mama. I've raised
them, see, and I've fed them. Got away from Miss
Craig. Oh, my God. I didn't do nothing, but where
can I see you? Where can I see you? Oh, goodness. Oh,
my goodness. Every year, I go out and go on the
group. I've got to be mad. I'm going to wait for
myself. We go, my name, my name. I go out west and
pick cotton. Pick cotton. Well that was hard work.
Didn't you have some entertainment? Do any
dancing or anything? Uh huh. Did you dance? Did you
dance? Dance. Oh, I used to dance. But I don't do it
now. No, I don't dance now. I try my best to serve my
master. I'm trying my best to serve my head.
Help me, Father. Silence. I'm trying my best to
serve God. I don't study about no man. Don't dance
now. You don't know, Mama. You danced in your young
days. Oh, in my young days? Yeah. Oh, I went to balls
when I was young. Oh, when I was young, I went to
dancing. I didn't tell, I ain't gonna tell no one
what I thought I went to dancing when I was young.
See, see, ma'am? Ma'am? Do you remember... Going
to town when you were young, were there any big
buildings back then? Oh, big building, Mama. When
you went to town when you were young, were the
streets dirt?
Did you go to town in a wagon when you were a young
girl? I don't know. Mama, you know what you used to
tell us? You used to go to town in the wagon. Oh, oh, I
did. Oh, we used to go in a horse wagon. I thought you
were talking about something else. Oh, yeah, we
used to go in a wagon. Celia, did you ever see a
stagecoach? Ever see what? A stagecoach. A
stagecoach, where the people rode in the
stagecoach and the horses pulled them. Did you
ever see one? Yes, I did. You call them and it's such
a funny name that I don't know what you're talking
about. What did you call them? I called them
Hossie. Hossie. Neal and Hossie. Neal and Hossie.
That's what my grandfather called them. Neal and
Hossie. What did Mr. and Ms. Clay ride in when they
would go somewhere? in a cage, what you call it, a
cage.
She called it a cage. It was a crane down there. A big
old thing that looked like a... Oh, you look like a
cop. Look like a cop. Did you hear anything about
the Indians at that day when you were young and the
things that they did? The Indians? No, no, no, no.
You're talking about the Indian people. Oh. I had
seen them, but I didn't know them. I had seen them,
but I didn't know nothing about them. I never did
get in and come to North Country with them. I never
did.
The Indians were pretty well gone at that time down
here, I think, but not to the North. Anything else
you're thinking of me about there? Well, we thank
you anyway. And we sure hope you have more
birthdays. And we're going to come up from the
Panhandle, so we've been thinking of you. We've
been thinking of you. God bless
you. Goodbye. Goodbye. I hope to meet you here. If
you don't leave, Andy... This was, hopefully, the
end of the war. The end of a new war.